Bill Tift at the University of California,
University of Arizona. Well, he's from the
University of Arizona, but we're currently at the
Student Union of the University of California.
Okay, so let's get started at the beginning, and
Bill, for the record, give your full name. William
Grant Tift. And where and when were you born? April
5th, 1932 in Derby, Connecticut. How did you first
get interested in astronomy? This has to do with
the history of planetary astronomy. I never
wanted to be anything else. I became interested in
science or knew I was going to be a scientist about
fourth grade in school in astronomy by the time I
was in eighth grade. And through a local amateur
astronomer, elderly lady in my hometown, I met
Dirk Brouwer at Yale.
the next major step well in various amateur
activities AAVSO things like that Westinghouse
Science Talent Search I was one of the trip winners
in 1950 to Washington and got to know Harlow
Shapley Harvard was the obvious place to go to get
undergraduate training and so I went to Harvard as
an undergraduate and you were an astronomy major I
was an astronomy major which is kind of rare well
there were a number of us several other names that
are Well, one in planetary astronomy is one of my
roommates was Fred Franklin at CFA. He's, I
believe, in planetary astronomy. Yes, and I
interviewed him in England. We were roommates at
Harvard. And Dick Sears, who's known in
astronomy, was one of the... So we had astronomy
majors in those days. When did you get your
bachelor's degree? 1954. Okay, and then where'd
you go to grad school? Caltech. Why did you pick
Caltech? Because astronomy was disintegrating
at Harvard. That was when Bach left Harvard and it
switched from an observational institution in
the Shapley Revolution. When Shapley resigned
and the Southern Hemisphere Observatory was
potentially being closed and things like that, it
was not a time to go on in observational astronomy
and Caltech was the obvious place where
first-rate observational astronomy was being
done. So I went to Caltech. And
what was your thesis and who was your thesis
advisor for your PhD? OK. My thesis was on the
photometry of the nuclei, nuclear regions of
galaxies, well, photometry of galaxies on an
eight-color system. My advisor was Art Code.
He was at Caltech at that time and then
later left Caltech. I guess he went back to
Wisconsin as director at that time. Bill Baum was
my other sort of advisor. I say sort of advisor
because I actually saw art code only twice during
my thesis, the beginning and at one intermediate
point. I had one discussion with Bill Baum.
Otherwise, I pretty much did it myself. When did
you get your PhD? 1958. Okay, and what did you do
then? I went as a postdoc to Australia to work on
Magellanic Cloud problems. With Bach? Well, Bach
was director then, and it was through Bach that I
made the arrangements. But again, it was a program
I designed myself. I wasn't working specifically
with anyone. Okay, now, so when did you leave
Australia? Okay, Australia, I was a two-year
National Science Foundation postdoc. I left
there in 1959
and finished the last few months of the postdoc
at... Caltech, and then I had arranged a job in
Nashville
with Carl Seifert at the University of, well, at
Vanderbilt University, Dyer Observatory.
Unfortunately, Carl Seifert had been killed in an
automobile accident. As a matter of fact, it was It
happened an hour before I arrived in Nashville for
my first visit. I was met by a graduate student, in
fact, Charles Tolbert, well-known in astronomy,
who told me that Carol had just been killed in an
automobile accident. I went to Seaford's
funeral.
But that changed what was to be a three-year
appointment working in high-latitude blue stars
to a one-year appointment, immediately looking
for a job, which is when, well, I had previously met
John Hall and was interested in possibilities at
Lowell, and so I immediately picked up that
thread. And since Harold Johnson had just left
Lowell and they had just acquired the Ohio State
69-inch telescope, And I had the kind of
credentials both in photometry and experience
with large telescopes. So basically I was offered
Errol Johnson's job at Lowell. So I was actually at
Vanderbilt then only for one year. Okay, when you
got to Lowell, what was the place like?
Well, it's a beautiful place to live and a
beautiful place to enjoy yourself. Perhaps one of
the most wonderful settings and pleasant places
to live. But I think the one thing which is most
obvious about Lowell, was obvious then, was the
extremely tight budget under which they
operated. The question of the controls of the
Lowell estate and a fairly small section, a
portion of which was devoted to maintaining the
observatory. And although I don't know many of the
details, I know there was a lot of concern about
whether any of the additional estate money would
become available to astronomy.
I never really went into any discussions on this,
but there was a lot of concern as to how you could
operate an effective modern observatory on the
extremely small amounts of money which were
available. You mentioned yesterday that early on
in the space program, when it was about time you
were getting involved, the powers that be or
whoever decided that they really didn't want to
get involved with the space program because it
didn't have the base on which to do it, which is kind
of surprising in that later that they did get the
Planetary Data Center and everything. Could you
say that for the record? Well,
for various reasons, part of them personal in my
own life, I was going through approaching divorce
and so on. It was a certain feeling on my part that I
needed some change. The space program was
developing, and I wrote a letter at one point to the
Institute for of Astrophysics, or whatever it is,
the NASA Institute in New York City, I believe, and
expressing interest in space astronomy, and was
referred to Jocelyn Gill and, I forget his first
name, Foster's division in NASA on manned space
astronomy, and They invited me back to Washington
for a while. I went back as a consultant for a couple
of months. What year was this, roughly? It had been
around 19... Well, I went to Lowell in 61. Probably
the original correspondence here was in 62,
possibly as late as 63. When I came back from
Washington, I was quite interested in the space
program and potentially interested in applying
to the astronaut program. In fact, I did apply
later in 1965. But... I remember having
discussions with John Hall and expressing my
interest in the space program and getting this
feedback or concern that, well, this really was
not the kind of direction that they felt that they
could support the program. That if I was
interested in going into this, that perhaps this
wasn't the proper base to operate from. And of
course, they had hired me. in a completely
different context, basically, to use, I mean, to
do photometry with some of the large, their newer
large telescope, well, the 6090s. Not that it was
that great a telescope, because it wasn't at that
time, until they redid it a few years later. And
made it into a, what, a 72-inch? 72-inch, with a
quality mirror. I spent a lot of time Well, there
were two problems. One, the 69-inch was not a
high-quality telescope. You couldn't do imagery
with it. The images tended to distort rapidly as a
function of temperature changes. I remember
doing a lot of installation work on the telescope,
trying to control the figure on the mirror. And
also, because of the very low budgets at Lolo, they
had very little instrumentation. There was no
equipment, really, to go with it. One reason they
had hired me was I did have my own part of my own
photometer. Harold Johnson had taken all the
equipment with him when he left, and there really
was no working equipment. I got a small O&R grant
with which I built up a working photometer and did
use the 69-inch to extend the work that I had done as
my dissertation. That was my main new scientific
research that I did at Lowell. But in parallel, I
was developing this interest in the space
program. And it was that aspect that,
well, John Lowell specifically was a little
apprehensive about whether this was an
appropriate type of development that Lowell
wanted to support. Let me just get something in for
the record. When did you leave Lowell? 1964,
essentially. Initially, it was halftime, I
think, from July to October of 64. I was halftime at
Lowell and halftime at Arizona. And then in
October of 64, I was full-time at Arizona. Where
you have been since then. Where I've been there
since then, that's correct. I went there as
associate professor and was promoted to full
professor in 1973.
when you were at Lowell. Now, Lowell's, of course,
famous to the public for its planetary and
particularly Mars studies, but of course they
always did, right from the very beginning, a lot of
stellar and galactic work, for which, of course,
they didn't get the credit that they deserved. But
when you were there, what was the attitude towards
planetary versus stellar and galactic and
extragalactic work? Well, there was a strong
support, I think, or a feeling that the work that
Harold had done and the study of star clusters,
there wasn't much experience there in galaxies,
although I remember having discussions with some
of the U.S. Naval Observatory people. There had
been some interesting work that had been done by,
hmm, what was his name? some multicolor
photography or multicolor imagery that had been
done on galaxies at Naval Observatory. I think
they were quite enthusiastic, actually, about
the work that I was doing on galaxy photometry. It
fit rather nicely into the kind of things that
Harold had been initially exploring. I'd also
done work in star clusters and things, so I had a lot
in common in principle with the kinds of things
that Harold Johnson had been doing. And I think
they were very enthusiastic about that kind of
work. I encountered
very little feeling that Lowell had a planetary
orientation, or there certainly was no pressure
in any sense to be doing anything that was
connected with planetary work. I think they
considered their work potentially quite
broad-based.
One of the very visible programs there was Henry
Giklis' work on proper motions of red faint stars,
and I actually was considering some observations
of some of the proper motion stars. I'd say it was a
fairly broad-based program, stellar,
extragalactic, and obviously planetary, but
that wasn't an aspect that I had much connection.
Did you ever feel that you were considered by real
astronomers to be second rate because you were at
Lowell instead of, say, Mount Holson? No, I didn't
have that feeling at all. I thought Lowell was a
highly respected observatory. It was recognized
that they had budgetary or monetary problems.
But, for example, my request for an O&R grant was
very well received. And Lowell, I think, was a very
respected observatory. And the people that were
there, not that there weren't very many of us, but
Bill Sinton was well-known. And, of course,
Harold Johnson had been extremely well-known. It
was a small group, but I think my general
impression was highly regarded. Now, you overlap
with some of the real old-timers there, and that's
what I want to hit you for. Yeah, yeah. Of
the Slipher brothers, I knew EC moderately. That
is, I met him a couple of times, had a few
discussions with him. Vesto, I saw a few times. He
was not around the observatory very much. And that
was really before I got into my modern work in
galaxies. In a way, I wish I'd had a chance to have
actually talked to some of them about some of the
early redshift work that they did. I never
actually had any direct contact on that. For the
record, of the two brothers, E.C. was the one who
did what? The two Slipher brothers. Well, again,
you probably know. I mean, I don't know the
history. Which one was the Mars guy? Well, I assume
EC was more of the planetary oriented, and Vesto a
little more. Well, I know Vesto, I believe, was the
one who did the
actual ridge observations. interesting in that
if you go back into elementary textbooks of 10 or 20
years ago, it's always Hubble, Hubble, Hubble,
and now people have been getting their act
together, and they note that it was really Slipher
that did it. Slipher did the actual first
observations. That's correct. Slipher was the
one who made the observations, though I believe
it's fair to say it was Hubble that recognized the
significance. And I don't really know what the
communication chains were between... I mean,
they obviously knew each other, and I think it...
Any material or information that was collected by
Schleifer became known and was used, at least as a
starting point, for Hubble. What exactly how it
influenced Hubble's beginning, I have really no
idea. But it puzzles me in a way, and that's why I
wish I had known at the time what I was going to be
doing later, because it would have been very
interesting to talk to the Schleifer brothers
about what were their original motivations for
doing this, and what were their impressions.
Unfortunately, I have no idea. They obviously
didn't pursue it or follow it up the way Hubble did.
So whether they considered it just a curiosity or
whether they really thought deeply about what
this might mean, I don't know. But they preceded
the knowledge of what they were looking at. And I
believe part of the original motivation for their
observations were undoubtedly the idea that
perhaps galaxies were We've seen this in the
literature, but again, I don't have it as a direct
statement for this life. Galaxies were
considered as possible solar systems in
formation. That was one of the old concepts. Did
you ever meet Lamplin? No. Because there was a lot
of radiometry that went on in the 20s and 30s. I knew
Edison Pettit, but that was back through... In
fact, Edison Pettit was the man who built the
photometer that I took to Australia. or built the
cold box, to my specifications. But he was the only
really old...
I guess he was retired from Mount Wilson, but he was
still running his machine shop in Pasadena, and I
was referred to him and made arrangements for him
to build my photometer. But again, I never had any
in-depth conversations with these people. I've
heard various stories about how the old work was
done, but... Well, let's hear an old story. Well,
like the first observations of photometry on the
100-inch telescope when they used a ballistic
galvanometer as the operating across the 10-foot
width of the Newtonian platform on the 100-inch
telescope to get the first photometric
deflections that were used in some of the early
galaxy photometry that people like Pettit and
Stevens and Whitford and so on were doing. at
Lowell when you were there, what did the people on
the staff think of Percival Lowell?
Well, I had the impression that he was a very highly
respected founder of the observatory. I never
heard anything negative. And the old library
there, the tours that they held, his founding of
the observatory, his original connection with
Mars and so on was always very highly regarded, as
far as I could tell. I was never directly, I'd say,
involved in any of this. I never remember any
conversations relating to Lowell. I had a number
of conversations with the,
what's
the man who administered the estate? executor,
not executor, but... Sole trustee or something,
wasn't it? Sole trustee, yes. Was his nephew or
something like that? Yes, his nephew. Roger
Lowell Putnam was the trustee, and I remember
going for a hike up Mount Humphreys. We didn't get
to the top, but I remember I went on a hike with him.
Again, the main theme that came through was...
Lack of money. I never detected anything but
enthusiasm for doing the best astronomy we can at
this institution, but we don't have much money.
How did the townsfolk treat the observatory and
the astronomers there? My impression, again, was
that this was a highly respected institution and
Again, I never detected any animosity or any
feeling that this
was anything but a real nice thing to have in town.
And it was a standard viewing place. People would
drive up the drive, and it was always considered
one of the best places to look over the surrounding
area. Mars Hill was certainly a local
institution. I just flew over it Saturday, and
there was a hole in the clouds. The only one between
I think San Antonio and San Francisco, and there
was Flagstaff, and there was Mars Hill with the
little white domes on top. Of course, Anderson
Mesa development had just started, and there were
a couple of... Well, there was, I guess... There
was a telescope down there, and I can't remember
the exact sequence in which these were moved or
built, which was the one connected with the...
lunar mapping program which was going on there.
And that was being done by, what, the Air Force?
That was the Air Force. It was an Air Force program
and it was specifically oriented towards
preparing best maps of the moon for the moon
landings, future moon landings. USGS, I guess it
was, and Gene Shoemaker's program, they were in
Flagstaff around that time. They were located on
the north side of town, a different location.
Yeah, I knew Gene Shoemaker, or got to know him
later, because we were both astronaut candidates
in 1965, but again, I had no direct connection,
just these were interesting programs which were
going on in the area. There was interest in
specifically the preparation for the moon
landing. I didn't associate any of this work with
any of the other aspects or any other parts of the
solar system. It was all very much moon-oriented.
Now, I want to take you to Arizona and then your
involvement with NASA because the title of this
book, God Willing the Creek Don't Rise, it gets
printed, is Phoenix, NASA and the Rebirth of
Planetary Astronomy. And you did have a strong
connection with NASA, which is how I first got to
meet you. When did this start? Well, I'd say it
started with this letter to NASA Space Science
Institute in New York City, and then was referred
to Jocelyn Gill, OSS, that branch of OSSA,
Because I was interested in the space program, and
I wanted to find out, well, was there any way of
getting more closely involved in it? That's why
Jocelyn Gill then invited me to come to
Washington, be a consultant in her office,
specifically preparing some training manuals or
answering questions for the astronauts. I
remember writing a little paper for Jocelyn on...
meteors as a little information paper for the to go
to the then Mercury and I guess by then Gemini
astronauts.
Out of this meeting with our original contacts
with Jocelyn and I don't remember the details I was
and I'd always kind of expressed interest in the
lunar program I was referred to a
conference that was being held in Chicago. At
O'Hare Airport. At O'Hare Airport. And I was the
guy that arranged it and chaired it. Right. It was
on the military orbiting laboratory. And at this
time, there were discussions about merging the
Air Force Orbiting Laboratory Program and NASA's
plans for orbiting laboratories. And this was
called the MOL conference or something. And I
don't remember exactly how I got invited to it, but
I'm sure it was in one way connected with out of
Jocelyn Gill's office. That's where the size of
the original space telescope, which is now called
Live Space Telescope, got to be 120 inches because
Aidan Meinel was there. And I asked him, what's the
biggest diffraction thing we could have in 10
years? And he said 120 inches. It was at that
meeting that I came in knowing very little about
what was going on. I, of course, had heard of the Air
Force program And I knew there were general
long-range plans on the part of NASA. And it
was at that meeting that basically I met Aiden
Meinel, who recognized my interest. And it was
then, I believe, was Harlan Smith at that meeting?
Yes. Both Harlan Smith and Aiden Meinel were at
that meeting. recognized this as a potential
field of development, apparently recognized me
as somebody who was interested in working in it.
And I got job offers very shortly from both Aden to
come to Arizona and from Harlan to come to Texas.
And
to basically begin developing manned space
science programs to help them in developing that
kind of program. And I like the atmosphere at
Arizona, particularly when I visited one right
after the other and accepted Aidan's offer to,
again, I hated to leave Lowell. It was a beautiful
place and I was doing good work in galaxy
photometry, but I say I needed a change for several
reasons. One was personal with my coming divorce.
I was divorced in 1964 with custody of two children
and then aged two and a half and three and a half. I
needed a change and I was very interested in the
space program and said, well, this is a good time to
go do something else. Hayden offered an
atmosphere and he's a remarkable person. So, of
course, was Harlan, but I learned photometry from
Harlan at Harvard, which was where I learned how to
do photoelectric photometry. But Arizona
offered the opportunity. The new space sciences
building had just been completed. The section was
dedicated to space astronomy that I helped to lay
out and built up. Well, we obtained a NASA grant,
initial grant, I guess, I'm not sure whether I'd
have to go back and look at the papers, exactly how
my name and Aidan's name were combined. His
philosophy was he would run the classified
military side of things, and I would handle the
NASA civilian side. What was NASA giving you the
money to do? Initially, it was experiment or
possible design. I think our original proposal
was a telescope that would float beside Gemini or
be carried on Gemini spacecraft and be operated
possibly remotely, maybe connected to it. We
wanted to investigate the possibility of
carrying a small telescope attached or slightly
detached from Gemini and operated in real time.
This then later led to the development of, well, I
had two fundamental programs that I worked on.
three actually, that were funded some out of NASA
headquarters and some later out of Marshall Space
Flight Center. One was to develop a ultraviolet
camera that would operate on a stable platform,
stabilized platform, for ultraviolet
photography with film recovery. The idea was to
bring back a as complete a survey of the sky in the UV
as possible. We were developing reflecting
filter, interference filter type coatings, and
design of a very compact aspheric system for wide
field imaging. And the idea was to do a sky survey,
photographic, and bring back the film. That was
one of our key programs. Here's one thing I've got
written down, and I want to ask you before I forget
it. In your opinion, what's NASA like today
compared to what it was in the early 60s? Well, if it
was like it was in the early 60s, I would probably
still be in it. What's changed? Well, as our
programs developed, as we got further into
experiment development and possibilities, It
became clear that there was, and you'll find this
in my discussion with Joe Terowitz, that there was
an intense conflict between the manned and the
unmanned side of NASA. And I was interested in the
manned side. I felt that man had a role in space. I
was also strongly oriented toward the lunar
program. and felt that we should get a base on the
moon as soon as possible and begin to develop some
self-sufficient. I thought the long range in
astronomy really should be founded on the moon.
But
what I saw progressively happening was a lot of,
well, I was being lost in this battle between
manned and unmanned astronomy.
Ultimately, when the things like the Vietnam War
developed and so on, everything seemed to be
turning downhill. I didn't see... We didn't get
our mission, for example. We would have flown on
Skylab 2. There had been a Skylab 2, but it was cut
off. We saw the follow-on OIO programs being cut
back. And it looked like, well... Yes, one could
hang on in the field, but the future really didn't
look very bright, and especially looked very
bright for manned astronomy. So I basically,
after spending quite a bit of NASA money, simply
decided that that wasn't a profitable field to
work in. I was on the original planning group for
the Large Space Telescope. I was a member of the
Woods Hole study group that led to the... led to the
planning for HST. But it was a long way downstream.
And I didn't see much opportunity in the interim
period. When you were getting NASA money, how did
headquarters handle you? Did they micromanage?
Do you think they knew what you were doing? Well,
they knew what I was doing. But I was supported for
funny reasons. I was in the manned space program.
And I had very strong connections with
particularly people at Marshall Space Flight
Center. They were interested in developing
basically packages for some of their large
rockets. They were interested in basically the
origin of the Skylab program, and they wanted
packages to put on them. They weren't getting
cooperation from NASA headquarters.
But I was well enough supported that that there was
a feeling at headquarters that they had better
support me, had better fund me, so that they would
have some control over what was going on. I
received money from Nancy Roman's office, not
because my programs were especially favored by
them, but so that they could retain some control of
what I was doing. And instead of being funded
entirely out of Marshall Space Flight Center,
which is where about half of my money came from,
there was a lot of... That's what I mean by this
conflict between... the headquarters and the
stations, this was very apparent in the work that I
was doing. It did play a role in the way I was funded.
Do you think that astronomers in general do a good
job of selling themselves to the public?
And this includes planetary astronomy because I
assume that that's part of astronomy. Well, I
think people have become much more aware of this
now than they were in the past. I think in the past,
the astronomy has barely been pretty naive in
assuming that just the fact that it's good
academic science should be sufficient. So
basically, I know, I don't think astronomers have
done a very good job of selling themselves to the
public. And it takes a lot of time to do it. And the
problem is, we'll say, the kind of work that I do.
We work as an individual scientist. You don't have
a lot of support, particularly if you do
controversial science like I do, with no support,
or practically no support. You don't have time to
spend a lot of time doing the popularizing. What
you need is a large enough base and the kind of
support that you can have a public relations
person. You need the kind of people around you who
can provide the interface. And that's an area we
have not seen, I don't think, well enough
supported. Scientists have got to be given enough
support that they can have some PR people who know
how to construct this interface. Because most of
us don't have the time to do it ourselves, nor the
knowledge. do it ourselves to do the proper kind of
interface and so i think there's been a lot of very
naive scientists who think that all they've got to
say is well i mean everybody knows good science
should be done that should be sufficient it isn't
sufficient you've got to popularize it you've got
to present it in a way that uh you'll be the public
would be more enthusiastic about. Very few
scientists know how to do that. Of course, if you go
way back, you know, to the turn of the century,
there were some really great promoters around in
astronomy, George Orwell. Now, that all seemed to
die, and what I always call the Mount Wilson, the
public be damned attitude took over. Yes, I would
agree very much with that, and we have seen the
basic, well, it's often called the Mount Wilson or
Caltech, Princeton Access
developed, and one had a feeling that, well, if
they thought something should be done, that
supposedly was all that was necessary. And there
were plenty of us out there who didn't agree with
that philosophy. I mean, Aidan Meinl and I were a
good example of who felt that we could have done a
lot more science in the man space program. than, in
fact, we ever got a chance to do because
the decisions had been made that it was to be done
one particular way. And the manned space program,
well, give us your money. We don't really care
about this program. Just give us the money and
we'll go ahead and do the astronomy. Do you think
that attitude is changing now?
Not entirely. I mean, we still see the same...
fundamental disagreement that astronomy
divides into, or science divides into those who
are willing to work with the manned program and
those who just want unmanned spacecraft. And
there's a role for both. I've always felt, and I
think that the public in many respects is more
enthusiastic, or there's a lot of enthusiasm
still for manned space-type activity. And I don't
think that resource was ever properly supported
by science, that approach. I can't interview any
of the participants in this, so I'm asking
everybody that might have an opinion. What do you
think killed planetary astronomy in the early
part of this century?
Killed it? I don't think it was ever killed. Sure,
there was some stuff being done in the 20s and 30s,
but But planetary astronomy was a big part of
astronomy at the turn of the century, and then by
the time you get to the 1920s, it's not. Oh, well,
okay. I mean, there was a big shift in interest
because the capabilities came along and the
knowledge came along to explore stellar
astronomy and then extra-galactic astronomy. I
mean, there's always a tendency to move,
certainly, or I feel, to move where the frontier
is. And the frontier is usually near the limits of
detection And when the planets are bright and easy
to look at. And I think a lot of the reason that
people turned back to planetary astronomy,
though, was when the close planetary flybys
started coming along. And people suddenly
realized how much more detail and interest or
interesting subjects there were that that It is
the space program itself that swung the interest
back in the direction of planetary astronomy,
because it became clear that so much more could, in
fact, be done. And then we had the new generations
of detectors. And it's kind of interesting. I
think you see these new techniques being focused
on very nearby things, like the solar system, and
very distant things. And there's a gap now. The gap
is now in between, where, for example, we're
looking at very distant galaxies and ignoring the
nearby ones. except for distance scale
calibrations and so on. We're making the
assumption, again, that we understand the nearby
thing, and I disagree very strongly on that. The
nearby galaxies are, I think, harbor some very
interesting...
Well, my own work on the Ritchie equation, of
course, is directly relevant there, but you see
this leapfrogging technique... From z equals
zero to z equals five. ...re-focus your attention
on the nearby things. I think the space program did
that. The primitive early investigations,
beginning as early as, say, the Ranger
spacecraft, which focused attention again on the
detailed surface of the Moon, or the properties of
the surface of the Moon. You see that once a
spacecraft had studied the Jupiter system, and
now a lot of interesting ground-based
observations of the of the satellites, of the
studies of EO and so on, was refocused by the space
program. I don't think the astronomers
themselves would have ever, by themselves, would
have ever gotten as enthusiastic about the solar
system if it hadn't been for the space program.
Recently, so you think that NASA money, really,
for probes and supporting ground-based
astronomy really brought back planetary
astronomy? Yes, I think I feel that very strongly.
I don't think it was the astronomers themselves,
even given the detectors. Well, some, I'm sure,
would have looked at the planets, but it was the
excitement generated by the space program that
brought, well, probably a lot of people had been
trained or trained their job opportunities were
conditional upon the availability of space
money. The number of astronomers trained was
increased considerably because of the space
program. Recently, a lot of people have been
getting a lot of publicity, and evidently money,
by working on topics such as search for
extraterrestrial intelligence, other solar
search for other solar systems uh the ozone hole uh
on the earth's atmosphere and killer comets and
asteroids you think they're overdoing it well i
think these are all valid fields of investigation
and i think the reason why some of these are
emphasized or why the focus is there is because
they are programs which you can popularize now i
don't think that's that should be the judge of how
you support science. And in a sense, yeah, I think I
would agree with you. I think some of these are
overemphasized in the sense of, well, the public
will support this, or we can put it in such a way that
the public will recognize its, quote,
importance. So, okay, that's a good way to go. I
think many of these, part of this work is motivated
by We need money, and this is a way to get money. And
not necessarily because it's necessarily the
best science. I'm sure that if you ask a general
cross-section of scientists what are the best
problems to concentrate on, that these would be
mentioned, but they certainly wouldn't be the
unique ones. And I think things like the SETI
program, there's
a lot of interest in this, and it is scientifically
important.
On the other hand, it's a little bit like the search
for missing mass. You can put an awful lot of effort
into it for very little return. And there's some
balance point. in terms of what is the reasonable
amount of resource and effort to put into this
until you get some indication that there's
something that really needs to be followed up. The
program should not become ends in themselves when
there's a little bit of a tendency, or more than a
little bit of a tendency, for them to become simply
a means of continuing support.
Without the proper checks and balances, are we
getting something back or are we really making
progress? What do you think the state of astronomy
is now? This includes planetary astronomy
because we all sink or swim in the same ocean.
Are we sinking? I think astronomy needs a...
Well, I think it has stagnated a little bit. We see
too much...
Well, I think there's a little bit of fear out
there. Nobody really knows how we're going to
continue to support this institution.
I think there's a feeling that we're going to see a
retraction and everybody is kind of scrabbling to
make sure that they're not the parts that are cut.
And in facing this retraction of support, uh i
think people are not looking objectively at the
science anymore but they're saying well what can i
get money for there's too much focus on what can i
get money for and too little on regardless of the
money what science should we what are the what are
the things that we must preserve in terms of
science there are a few odd people like myself who
would i will pursue what i think should be done in
science, I don't have outside support. So I can
speak a little bit objectively. I don't worry
about protecting my resources because my
resources are my own salary. And I mean, I came to
this meeting, I paid my own way. And I go observing
at National Radio Observatory, I pay my own way. I
don't have support even from my own institution.
Well, the institution doesn't have the money to
give me. Everything comes from these outside
grants. And when you do controversial work, it's
very difficult to get these outside grants. I
think that's wrong. And in that sense, I say our
science is being driven by large
money programs rather than supporting
scientific ideas. Of course, you were at Lowell
when it was still in the bailing wire and sealing
wax era.